hello maths fans given the current
global crisis let's use this opportunity
to do something positive and learn about
exponential growth in the context of an
epidemic I'm going to run a pretend
scenario where I have the disease but
because I have no symptoms I go about my
daily life business as usual and see
where we end up current estimates from
the World Health Organization for the
virus co vid 19 give a reproductive
number R naught or r0 of around 3 so
what this means in practice is that if I
have the disease in this pretend
scenario then I would expect to infect
around 3 other people
now there are four of us that have the
virus but the good news is that I'm
starting to feel a lot better so whilst
I'm no longer infectious the three new
people that I've passed the disease on
to will then go on themselves to infect
another three people each
12 people have the virus the original
three that I infected plus another nine
that they went on and infected
themselves and those nine new infections
will go on and each infect another three
people
thirty-six people are now ill we've got
the nine from five days previous plus 27
new infections it's getting pretty
crowded
and eight people now have the virus the
27 people who were infected five days
earlier have each gone on to infect
another three people giving 81 new cases
it's fair to say that things are now
definitely getting serious
324 people now have the virus which is
far too many for me to fit on screen
using data from 2018 13% of the UK
population is age 70 and above so this
means potentially 42 people from the
most vulnerable age group now have the
virus and face a battle to stay alive
one month on and we have 1296 cases of
the virus based on data from the Chinese
Center for Disease Control and
Prevention this could potentially lead
to 17 deaths
that's 17 people who have died from a
virus that can be traced back to me
the good news is that by practicing
social distancing and reducing exposure
to others these numbers are drastically
reduced the exact same scenario with 50%
less exposure leads to only 19
infections after 30 days where only two
of those come from the most vulnerable
groups and therefore a very good chance
that there are no deaths the numbers
don't lie
please stay at home and stay safe
you